The Duke and Duchess of Windsor meeting
Adolf Hitler. Hitler treated the Duchess with full
royal deference.
1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and
Duchess of Windsor
(Redirected from Duke and Duchess of Windsor's 1937 tour of Germany)
Prince Edward, Duke of Windsor, and Wallis, Duchess of
Windsor, visited Nazi Germany in October 1937. Edward
had abdicated the British throne in December 1936, and
his brother George VI had become king. Edward had been
given the title Duke of Windsor and married Wallis
Simpson in June 1937. He appeared to have been
sympathetic to Germany in this period and, that
September, announced his intention to travel privately to
Germany to tour factories. His interests, officially
researching the social and economic conditions of the
working classes, were against the backdrop of looming
war in Europe. The Duke's supporters saw him as a
potential peacemaker between Britain and Germany, but
the British government refused to sanction such a role,
opposed the tour and suspected that the Nazis would use
the Duke's presence for propaganda. Prince Edward was keen for his wife, who had been rejected by
the British establishment, to experience a state visit as his consort. He promised the government to
keep a low profile, and the tour went ahead between 12 and 23 October 1937.
The Duke and the Duchess, who were officially invited to the country by the German Labour Front,
were chaperoned for much of their visit by its leader, Robert Ley. The couple visited factories, many of
which were producing materiel for the rearmament effort, and the Duke inspected German troops.
The Windsors were greeted by the British national anthem and Nazi salutes. They dined with high-
ranking Nazis such as Joseph Goebbels, Hermann Göring, Joachim von Ribbentrop, and Albert Speer,
and had tea with Adolf Hitler in Berchtesgaden. The Duke had a long private conversation with Hitler,
but it is uncertain what they discussed, as the minutes of their meeting were lost during the war. The
Duchess took afternoon tea with Hitler's deputy, Rudolf Hess. Hitler was sympathetic to the Windsors
and treated the Duchess like royalty.
The British government was unable to affect the course of events and forbade its diplomatic staff in
Germany from having any high-level interaction with the Windsors. British popular opinion of the
tour was muted, and most people viewed it as in poor taste and disrupting the first year of George's
reign. The tour of Germany was intended to have been followed by one of the United States, but Nazi
repression of working-class activists in Germany led to a wave of disapproval for the Windsors in the
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Map of Europe in 1923
American labour movement, which led to the U.S. visit being cancelled. Modern historians tend to
consider the 1937 tour as a reflection of both the Duke's lack of judgment and his disregard for the
advice that he received.
Edward VIII became king after the death of his father, George V, in early 1936. Almost immediately,
he announced his intention to marry Wallis Simpson, a twice-divorced American. On political
and moral grounds, she was unacceptable as a royal consort to the British government and royal
family.
As king, Edward was the titular governor of the Church of England, which forbade the
divorced from remarrying during the lifetime of their former spouses, and both of Simpson's previous
husbands were still alive. The proposed marriage was believed by critics to breach Edward's
coronation oath,
and weakened his position as constitutional monarch.
Edward knew that if
he forced the issue, Stanley Baldwin's government would almost certainly resign en masse.
Edward realised that his family, the government, the Church, and the people would not support the
marriage. Thus, in December 1936, he abdicated. His younger brother, the Duke of York,
succeeded him as George VI, and Edward was given the title of Duke of Windsor. Edward and
Simpson married in France in June the following year, and having honeymooned in Vienna, they
returned to Paris and established their headquarters there. Internationally, journalist Andrew
Morton stated that the Duke was viewed as being
Modern, progressive, vigorous, and accessible. Even his mock Cockney accent with a touch of
American seemed more down-to-earth and unaffected than the disdainful patrician tones of
a man like Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden. He remained an intriguing international
celebrity, his marital turmoil only enhancing the iconic mystery surrounding the man.
The European political background to the tour was tense. The
Spanish Civil War, which had broken out the previous year, upset
the balance of power and drew in the Soviet Union, Italy, and
Germany. Also, Germany was becoming increasingly
aggressive and had spent the previous few years rearming. In the
United Kingdom, there was a sense of political unease towards the
future and an expectation of war although foreign policy
remained predicated on appeasement.
Baldwin resigned as
prime minister in May 1937 and was replaced by his deputy,
Neville Chamberlain.
Historian Michael Bloch states that although with hindsight, the tour can be viewed as a poor
decision, it was not out of place for the time. He notes that "war was still two years away, curiosity
about the Nazis was intense, and many respectable people accepted government invitations. It was
fashionable to go to Germany and visit Hitler in the mid-thirties just as it was to go to China and visit
Background
Political context
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Mao Tse-tung in the sixties". The former prime minister, David Lloyd George, had visited Germany
two years before the Windsors. The leader of the Labour Party, pacifist George Lansbury met with
Hitler in April 1937. Also, Lord Halifax, later foreign secretary, visited to do so, at Göring's
invitation, the following month. Halifax's trip was "ostensibly ... a social one", but it was also an
opportunity for the British government to initiate talks with Hitler, according to modern historian
Lois G. Schwoerer.
Similarly, Hitler hosted many non-Germans, including Aga Khan III, papal
nuncio Cesare Orsenigo, ambassadors, government ministers, and European royals, at his residence
in Bavaria, the Berghof.
George VI is said to have been horrified by his brother's entry into European political affairs at such a
delicate time. George wrote to Edward's political advisor, Walter Monckton, that the Duke's
plan was "a bombshell, and a bad one". George took particular umbrage because on abdication,
Edward had said that he intended to avoid public appearances. Royal biographer Sarah Bradford
suggests that the visit indicated that Edward had no intention of retiring: rather, he intended to
behave independently of the King's and the government's wishes.
Contemporaries were aware of the negative connotations of a trip to Germany at the time. The
announcement took everyone by surprise, and those sympathetic to Edward, such as Winston
Churchill and Lord Beaverbrook, attempted to dissuade him from going. The intervention of
an old friend of the Duchess, Herman Rogers, against the trip also proved unsuccessful. The
government already suspected that Edward had "strong views on his right to intervene in affairs of
state", argues historian Keith Middlemas, but its "main fears ... were of indiscretion". The Foreign
Office warned the Duke that the Nazis were propaganda experts; the Duke agreed but promised not to
speak publicly while he was there. The government, argues historian Deborah Cadbury, was
concerned that the Duke would gather a party around him and promote his own personal foreign
policy, outside government control.
Edward stated that his intention for the visit as "without any political considerations and merely as an
independent observer studying industrial and housing conditions". He said that one could not
ignore what was happening in Germany "even though it may not have one's entire approval". The
Duke was sympathetic to the cause of improving working conditions.
Historian Frances Donaldson suggests that his views "had caused offence in England because,
according to opinion there, such matters were not the concern of the throne". Statements such as
that one, scholar Adrian Philips emphasises, were intended to deflect from Edward's public
relationship with Simpson.
Edward was an admirer of Germany and fluent in its language, which the Duke in his
memoirs called "the Muttersprache [mother tongue] of many of our relations". He knew,
too, that German blood "flowed strongly in him", and researcher Mark Hichens speculates that
Edward's ancestry led him to favour German culture. As Prince of Wales, he had studied
at Magdalen College, Oxford, under Hermann Georg Fiedler,
and he had toured Germany twice
Royal and governmental view
Political views of the Duke and Duchess
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Stanley Baldwin, prime
minister during the
abdication crisis
before World War I broke out in 1914. One of his friends, Chips Channon, Conservative MP for
Southend West, commented in 1936 that he "is going the dictator way, and is pro-German".
Simpson was also believed to hold similar views on account of her rejection by the British ruling
class,
and many within the government suspected her to have spied for Hitler while she lived in
Britain though she denied that in her autobiography. The FBI also monitored her throughout
the period and concluded that she had Nazi sympathies. It had been rumoured that she and Joachim
von Ribbentrop had a sexual relationship during his tenure as German ambassador in London during
the mid-1930s. Albert von Mensdorff-Pouilly-Dietrichstein, a former Austrian ambassador
to the UK who was George V's second cousin, believed that both Windsors favoured German fascism
as a bulwark against communism in Europe. Edward also, according to the Count, favoured an
alliance with Nazi Germany around the time.
Edward himself later contextualised his position in the 1930s as being a
reaction to what he termed "the unending scenes of horror" of the First
World War. He said that led him to support appeasement with Hitler. The
latter is known to have seen the Duke as an ally, believing that as king,
Edward would have strengthened Anglo-German relations. Albert Speer later
said that Hitler was certain that "through him permanent friendly relations
could have been achieved. If he had stayed, everything would have been
different." The Duke, suggests biographer Anne Sebba, probably
wanted to restore the countries' close ties, which had been broken by the First
World War. He also wanted to make his new wife the centrepiece of a state
visit. Historian Ted Powell suggests that the Duke would have visited any
country that would accept his wife on his terms. Edward's equerry, Dudley
Forwood, points out that the only possible state visit was to Germany and
also suggested that the Duke wished to prove to his wife that he had lost
nothing by abdicating.
A tour of Germany had been broached with the Duke before his wedding by French businessman
Charles Bedaux, whom Bloch describes as an "enigmatic time and motion tycoon". Edward was
agreeable and saw it as a way of raising his profile. By April 1937, Colonel Oscar Solbert had
suggested that the Duke take a tour of Germany, which was soon intended to be the first of several
planned international tours. Bedaux offered to organise the Duke's side of the arrangements.
Solbert had been with Edward on his 1924 tour of the United States and had been impressed by his
gravitas and professional demeanour. That led him to suggest to the Duke that he should "head up
and consolidate the many and varied peace movements throughout the world". Swedish
millionaire Axel Wenner-Gren acted as a go-between for the Duke in the early discussions. Bedaux
wrote to Solbert to tell him:
The Duke of Windsor is very much interested in your proposal that he lead a movement so
essentially international. We all know that as Prince of Wales and as King, he has always
been keenly interested in the lot of the working man and he has not failed to show both his
distress and his resolve to alter things whenever he has encountered injustice ... Yet he is not
Overture and organisation
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Robert Ley was the
Windsors' chaperone
during their tour.
satisfied with the extent of his knowledge. He is determined to continue, with more time at
his disposal, his systematic study of this subject and to devote his time to the betterment of
the life of the masses ... He believes his is the surest way to peace. For himself he proposes to
begin soon with a study of housing and working conditions in many countries ...
—
Charles Bedaux to Oscar Solbert, 23 August 1937
The tour of Germany was planned to be a brief visit of 12 days but was to be followed by a longer one
of the U.S. The German side of things was organised by Hitler's adjutant, Captain Fritz
Wiedemann,
with final preparations discussed at the Paris Ritz in late September.
The same
month, the Duchess wrote to her aunt in Washington that they were planning a trip to observe
European working conditions. The Duchess explained that "the Duke is thinking of taking up some
sort of work in that direction. The trip is being arranged by Germany's No. 1 gentleman so should be
interesting". However she noted that at that stage, it was still only a proposal. Writer Hugo Vickers
suggests that Edward believed himself to be able to influence Hitler and avert war in Europe. If that
was the case, says Vickers, Edward "severely overestimated his own importance".
Several contacts visited the Windsors at their Paris hotel, Le Meurice, but the nature of their
discussions remains unknown, which has encouraged what Cadbury terms colourful theories. One
such, for example, by Charles Higham, suggests that on one occasion the Duke received Hitler's
deputy, Rudolf Hess, Hess's assistant Martin Bormann, and Hollywood actor Errol Flynn
together. It is more likely, she claims, that the rooftop restaurant meetings involved men
such as Wiedemann finalising the itinerary and other minutiae.
Powell suggests that Edward found the German government's response to be
sufficiently sympathetic to proceed without delay. In late September, he
received a personal invitation from Dr Robert Ley, the head of the German
Labour Front (GLF). Edward first indicated that he intended to
accept in a letter to the British chargé d'affaires in Berlin, George Ogilvie-
Forbes, on 20 September. A public announcement followed two weeks
later. A telegram to the Foreign Office stated:
In accordance with the Duke of Windsor's message to the world
press last June that he would release any information of interest
regarding his plans or movements, His Royal Highness makes it
known that he and the Duchess of Windsor are visiting Germany and
the United States in the near future for the purpose of studying
housing and working conditions in these two countries.
Historian Jonathan Petropoulos suggests that the British government knew that it could not prevent
what was officially a visit by a private individual. In private, the news angered both Downing
Street and Buckingham Palace. The Permanent Under-Secretary at the Foreign Office, Robert
Vansittart, wrote to the King's Private Secretary, Alec Hardinge, to condemn the tour. Hardinge
Announcement
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
agreed and described it as a "private stunt for publicity purposes". He also reasoned that the
premise of the tour was flawed: neither the Duke nor his visit, he said, could "obviously ... bring any
benefit to the workers themselves". Ley proposed to hold Nazi rallies at each stop on the Windsors'
tour, but the Duke had vetoed it on the grounds that it constituted anti-British propaganda.
Historian Andrew Roberts suggests that the German government believed that Edward had been
forced to abdicate as a result of his pro-German views, which encouraged them to "lay out the red
carpet" for him. On 10 October, the Duke's cousin, the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha,
wrote to him, "dear David! I hear that you are coming to Germany ... I naturally would be
delighted if you could take this opportunity to see me; perhaps I could introduce you to a couple of
interesting personalities whom you otherwise wouldn't meet". Hitler and Ribbentrop planned that
although the tour was a private rather than state visit, the Windsors, particularly the Duchess,
would effectively undertake a royal progress.
That was first demonstrated on their arrival, early
Monday morning, at Berlin's Friedrichstraße station on 11 October. Scholar Susanna de Vries
describes how the Duchess "covered in jewels ... did her best to look suitably royal", dressed in
royal blue. They were greeted by Ley, who kissed her hand and called her "Your Highness".
With Ley was a welcoming delegation including Ribbentrop and the deputy to the Gauleiter of Berlin,
Artur Görlitzer. Also waiting was the British Embassy's Third Secretary to present a letter
informing the Duke that the Embassy would not be available to assist him or his wife formally in the
course of their visit. Ogilvie-Forbes later visited the Duke in his hotel to pay the personal respects
that he had been unable to pay him in public.
A welcoming crowd of approximately 2,000 lined the streets outside the station. The German media
had set great store by the Windsors' visit from the beginning. As the Windsors were leaving, the
crowd surged forward, and a crush ensued. That, noted Cadbury, destroyed the "majestic air" of the
reception that Ley had organised. With few of the crowd having seen them, the couple were driven
away at high-speed in their Mercedes, to their hotel, the Kaiserhof.
Pathé caught the moment they emerged from the station into a large crowd that had gathered
determined to see this unique couple: a king who had thrown away the greatest throne in the
world for love, and the woman herself, who must possess some magical quality. Dr Ley, the
head of the German delegation, wearing his brown Nazi uniform and for once not drunk,
delighted them both by deferring to her as 'Her Royal Highness'.
—
Deborah Cadbury
The couple were treated like royalty by the German aristocracy, which "would bow and curtsy
towards [the Duchess], and she was treated with all the dignity and status that the Duke always
wanted".
On their first night in Berlin, they joined Ribbentrop for dinner at Horcher. The night was attended by
Speer with whom they discussed classical music, and Magda and Joseph Goebbels, who were
Germany's de facto first lady and Reich Minister of Propaganda respectively. After their
11–23 October 1937
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
The Duke of Windsor inspecting SS troops at
Ordensburg Krössinsee; Ley is in the light-coloured
coat.
meeting, Goebbels wrote in his diary that "the duke
is wonderful—a nice, sympathetic fellow who is
open and clear and with a healthy understanding
of people ... It's a shame he is no longer king. With
him we would have entered into an alliance."
The Duchess did not reciprocate, describing him as
"a tiny, wispy gnome with an enormous skull", but
Magda, she continued, was "the prettiest woman I
saw in Germany". The Windsors dined with his
cousin the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha on the
19th. The Duke later recalled that the dinner
was attended by over 100 guests, many whom he
had "hobnobbed" with at both his father's jubilee
and then his funeral.
The Berlin correspondent of the British Observer newspaper, reporting the couple's arrival, wrote that
they could look forward to a "heavy programme" of events. The couple and their entourage, which
included the Duke's cousin Prince Philipp von Hessen,
travelled around Germany on Hitler's
personal train, the Führersonderzug,
while their telephones were bugged by Prince Christoph
of Hesse on the orders of Reichsstatthalter Hermann Göring to keep the Nazi leadership informed of
the Windsors' private opinions. The German government was funding the visit, which modern
historian John Vincent suggests allowed them to choreograph it. Hichens, too, notes that the
Windsors "saw only what the Nazis wanted them to see, and the Duke saw what he wanted to see
turning a blind eye on the horrors of Nazidom". For example, according to Morton, they visited a
barracks of apparently-empty concrete buildings that they later realised had been a concentration
camp. When the Duke enquired as to their purpose, Ley replied, wrote Forwood later, "
'it is where
they store the cold meat.' In a horrible sense that was true."
Although the couple were in Germany at Ley's personal invitation, he was a poor host. Bloch
describes him as coarse, "addicted to alcohol [and] high-speed driving", and risqué
jokes. Hichens views Ley as "loud-mouthed", brutal and a "particularly odious Nazi thug." On
one journey, he was drunk at the wheel of the Windsors' Mercedes while he was driving at speed and
crashed them into the gates of the Munich factory that they were visiting. One of Ley's aides,
Hans Sopple, later described events, saying Ley "drove the car through the locked gates and then
raced up and down at full speed between the barracks, scaring hell out of the workers and nearly
running over several. The next day Hitler told Göring to take over the Duke's visit before Ley killed
him." That was not, comments Morton, "at all what the Duke had in mind when he described the
nature of a royal tour to his wife".
Bloch describes the couple's itinerary as an "exhausting" series of visits to industrial and housing
areas. A letter from the Duchess confirms that although the tour was interesting, it involved
walking "miles a day through factories", including one that produced lightbulbs. Among other
sights, they saw a winter relief centre, a Wagnerian opera in a workers' concert hall, and
inspected a Pomeranian SS squadron with the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler, Hitler's personal
Itinerary
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Colourised postcard from 1911 of
the Daimler-Motoren-Gesellschaft
factory in Untertürkheim
bodyguard. The Duchess did not accompany her husband
everywhere; he visited the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft at
Untertürkheim alone, which was intended to showcase German
precision engineering to the Duke, and while there he met British
racing driver Richard Seaman, who had signed for the Mercedes-
Benz team earlier in the year.
On 14 October, the Duke and the Duchess visited Göring at his
jagdschloss in Carinhall,
where they saw his miniature
railway.
There, Hitler's deputy gave them high tea, followed by
a tour of his large art collection and gymnasium, where,
although dressed in full uniform and decorations, he
demonstrated his massage machine. The three conversed in Göring's study, where Edward
noticed a new, official map of Nazi Germany on the wall. Reflecting the party's Anschluss policy,
Austria was shown as annexed to Germany. Cadbury quotes Simpson: "Göring's face wrinkled with
amusement ... The Austrians would want to be part of the Reich", he had said. Simpson noted that
"the moment passed, the statement left unchallenged" by the Duke.
They visited an Academy for Youth Leadership, where they observed the training of Hitler Youth
members. On an inspection of the Krupp factory in Essen, production of tanks and U-boats had
already begun. On each visit, the couple were presented with enthusiastic workers keen to extol
their working conditions to the Duke. He, in turn, was at his most charming, says Hichens. On one
occasion, he joined a session of rowdy drinking songs in a staff beer garden, where he wore a false
moustache and played skittles. The couple were regularly greeted with the Nazi salute, which they
sometimes reciprocated (that was not unusual, and most visitors to Germany, including sports
teams, then made the salute). The couple were welcomed at each venue by both the German and
the British national anthems. The Nazis, researcher Peter Allen finds, knew the Duchess to have a
keen interest in china, and as such, they included a trip to the Meissen porcelain works. Allen suggests
that this demonstrated a policy of pleasing the Duke through his wife. On a visit to one of Ley's
GLF meetings Edward made a speech, telling the assembly:
I have travelled the world and my upbringing has made me familiar with the great
achievements of mankind, but that which I have seen in Germany, I had hitherto believed to
be impossible. It cannot be grasped, and is a miracle; one can only begin to understand it
when one realizes that behind it all is one man and one will.
Simpson, meanwhile, notes Morton, maintained the fiction in her letters to her friends and family that
they were merely sightseeing.
The tour culminated on 22 October, when they met Hitler at the Berghof. It is possible that the
meeting was a last-minute addition to their itinerary, as they were supposedly told of it only the
previous day, although Allen suggests that this was unlikely, as Hitler had expressed a wish to meet
the Duke.
Meeting Hitler
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Page one Page two
Letter from Ogilvie-Forbes to Oliver Harvey at the
Foreign Office, 13 October 1937, in his first report
on the Windsors' tour since their arrival in
Germany
The Duke and the Duchess had to wait before Hitler
was ready to see them although, notes Vickers, he
was in a genial mood when he did. The two men
had an hour-long discussion, with Hitler doing most
of the talking. The Duke is known to have
encouraged Hitler in Germany's desired territorial
expansion into Central and Eastern Europe. The
minutes of the meeting appear to have been lost,
presumably destroyed during the war. The
Duchess did not join her husband but instead had tea
with Hess. General Ernst Wilhelm Bohle
acted as her interpreter. A friend of the Windsors,
French millionaire Paul-Louis Weiller, later said that
the Duchess had organised the meeting with Hitler
and that being excluded from it had angered her.
At the end of their visit, the three had tea together.
Hitler's partner, Eva Braun, was not present:
whenever he entertained guests of high rank, she had to stay in her bedroom until they had left.
The Windsors made a good impression on Hitler, suggests Hichens; the Duchess later wrote how
she was both "fascinated and repelled" by Hitler. Hitler, comments historian Philip Ziegler,
"mildly irritated the Duke by insisting on using an interpreter rather than speaking directly to him in
German". Interpreter Paul Schmidt later recalled the meeting:
Hitler was evidently making an effort to be as amicable as possible towards the Duke, whom
he regarded as Germany's friend, having especially in mind a speech the Duke had made
some years before, extending the hand of friendship to Germany's ex-servicemen's
associations. In these conversations, there was, so far as I could see, nothing whatever to
indicate whether the Duke of Windsor really sympathised with the ideology and practices of
the Third Reich, as Hitler seemed to assume he did. Apart from some appreciative words for
the measures taken in Germany in the field of social welfare, the Duke did not discuss
political questions.
Forwood disagrees with Schmidt's recollection and says that the Duke raised criticisms of Nazi social
policy. Forwood also says that at the same time, Forwood accused Schmidt of mistranslating for Hitler
and that Forwood interjected "Falschübersetzt!" or "wrongly translated!" The Duke departed, he
believed, under the impression that Hitler was a pacifist. An observer describes how they returned
to their car and were escorted by their host:
The Duchess was visibly impressed with the Führer's personality, and he apparently
indicated that they had become fast friends by giving her an affectionate farewell. [Hitler]
took both their hands in his saying a long goodbye, after which he stiffened to a rigid Nazi
salute that the Duke returned.
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Historian Volker Ullrich argues that Hitler seems to have been flattered that the Windsors wanted to
see him. Weidemann later said that he had rarely seen Hitler "so relaxed and animated as during that
visit". The meeting concerned the British government since it appeared to be almost an informal
summit. Three days earlier, Hitler had been telephoned by future British Foreign Secretary, Lord
Halifax, regarding Germany's expansionist policies. Halifax had pressed the benefits of a mutual
understanding between their two countries. The Windsors' visit soon after, says Sebba, probably
encouraged Hitler to see Edward as an ally. Edward later said that he had thought Hitler was "a
somewhat ridiculous figure, with his theatrical posturings and his bombastic pretensions", and he
denied to his wife that he and Hitler had discussed politics at all. The Duke's interpreter, Dudley
Forwood, also put down his different recollection of what was said by writing how "my Master said to
Hitler the Germans and the British races are one, they should always be one. They are of Hun
origin."
The Duke and Duchess spent the last night of their tour back in Munich, where they stayed at the Vier
Jahreszeiten Hotel; the Duke received some personal guests. One of them was a Kreisleiter of the Nazi
Party, who had previously been Master of Ceremonies for Grand Duke Adolphus Frederick VI of
Mecklenburg-Strelitz, a personal friend of the Duke's father. The main event was a dinner given by
Rudolf and Ilse Hess and attended by high-ranking Nazi officials. Petropoulos comments that
although there are no records of what may have been discussed at the dinner, "it is striking that the
Duke and Hess, both future advocates of a negotiated peace, had the opportunity to spend the evening
together and review the Windsors' tour". Ilse Hess later told how at one point, the Duke and her
husband had been gone for over an hour. She found them in an upstairs games room. There, Hess had
a large collection of model ships, and he and the Duke were "excitedly" re-enacting a World War I
naval battle.
The British government vainly tried to control public relations during the visit. Cadbury notes how
a former English king "turning up in ... Berlin was an unexpected bonus" for German diplomacy.
German newspaper Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung boasted about the number and the quality of the
people who wanted to see the Nazis' social programme first hand, and it wrote that "the Duke of
Windsor, too, has come to convince himself personally of the energy with which the new Germany has
tackled her social problems". The German government took advantage as soon as the Duke and
Duchess departed. Ogilvie-Forbes reported that Ley had already announced that Edward had praised
Hitler's leadership. Hitler subsequently asserted that Simpson, in his opinion, would have been a
good queen. Hitler believed Edward understood the Führerprinzip,
and that he was a man
with whom the Nazis could work. The tour may have given rise to later suspicions that in the event of
a successful outcome to Operation Sea Lion, a German invasion of Britain, the Duke would have been
appointed as a puppet king.
In his diary, the Earl of Crawford summed up the British
establishment's views on the Duke:
He had put himself hopelessly in the wrong by starting his visit with a preliminary tour in
Germany where he was, of course, photographed fraternizing with the Nazi, the Anti-Trade
Unionist and the Jewbaiter. Poor little man. He has no sense of his own and no friends with
any sense to advise him. I hope this will give him a sharp and salutary lesson.
Reactions
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Neville Chamberlain was
prime minister during the
Windsors' German tour.
—
The Earl of Crawford
Similarly, diplomat and soldier Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart noted in his
diary that he expected Edward to return sooner rather than later as "a
social-equalising king, inaugurate an English form of fascism and an
alliance with Germany". To the British ruling class, comments
Morton, the Windsors' "farrago was greeted with undisguised glee".
On the other side of the parliamentary divide, the Labour Party MP
Herbert Morrison (leader of the London County Council) wrote that "if
the Duke wants to study social problems he had far better quietly read
books and get advice in private, rather than put his foot in it in this
way". The Times reported how "His Royal Highness acknowledges
with smiles and the National Socialist salute the greetings of the crowds
gathered at his hotel and elsewhere during the day". The Daily
Express, meanwhile, stated that Edward had received "the kind of
reception that only the old kings of Bavaria could expect". The
reaction in Germany, according to the British attaché in Leipzig, was
that the tour had demonstrated the Duke's "strong pro-fascist
sympathies". In the Soviet Union, the view was that the British royal
family had "warm feelings" for Germany.
The most positive aspect of the visit, comments Powell, "was that it had been well-organised, albeit for
the benefits of the hosts". Philips calls the tour "an embarrassment at best, and at worse, glaring
proof of his complete lack of judgement". Piers Brendon describes it as "the worst blunder of his
career". Roberts calls the tour "fantastically ill-judged", and Bloch notes that the Duke's
political contemporaries were all in agreement that starting the tour in Nazi Germany at such a time
was nothing short of "disastrous". Scholar Julia Boyd, comparing the meeting with Hitler with
others that had taken place—the Aga Khan, for example—notes that while attracting a great deal of
comment, they "could not compete with the Duke and Duchess of Windsor ... in terms of celebrity and
sheer inappropriateness".
Sebba explains Edward's lack of judgement by the fact that while he had been able to call on a wide
spectrum of counsel as Prince of Wales, he now had only his wife and acquaintances. Powell,
similarly, believes that Edward's reputation "was at the mercy of unscrupulous strangers". Ziegler,
conversely, suggests that while the trip may have been "ill-advised and ill-timed ... [it was] not a
crime". Vickers, similarly, suggests that while the tour may have helped fuel the theory that the
Duke was a Nazi, "he was no such thing. But he was naive, and having been brought up with people to
advise him all his life until December 1936 he was hardly competent or equipped to deal with men like
Hitler. Nor should he have undertaken this trip independently."
According to Sebba, Edward promised to refrain from making speeches so that his words could not be
used against him by critics. Some scholars, such as Bradford, believe the visit to be directly the
result of "pro-German and even more pro-Nazi" views. German people who witnessed the Duke
Historiography
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
on tour, suggests Morton, did not see him "either publicly or privately, as a collaborator, appeaser or
traitor to his country. Far from it." Scholar Gerwin Strobl agrees and writes:
When the Nazis were dealing with a useful fool, they could never quite disguise an element of
contempt in their language; when they met a rogue, their words betray a shared contempt for
others. There is nothing of this in the descriptions of the Duke's conversations in Berlin or
the later wartime recollections of his actions and opinions. Instead, there is something one
comes across only very rarely in Nazi utterances: genuine respect; the respect felt for an
equal."
The Windsors' German tour made little impact on the British public, and the main criticism seems to
have been the failure to keep the low profile that he had promised. Churchill, for example, wrote to the
Duke to imply that there had been little notice taken of the Nazi aspect and that he was "glad it all
passed off with such distinction and success". The new prime minister, Neville Chamberlain,
disagreed with the tour and privately worked against it, but, comments historian of Nazi Germany
Karina Urbach, "as a convinced monarchist [he] did everything to keep the institution intact".
In 1966, the Duke described his memories of meeting Hitler, who had, Edward said, "made me realize
that Red Russia [sic] was the only enemy and that Great Britain and all of Europe had an interest in
encouraging Germany to march against the east and to crush communism once and for all ... I thought
that we ourselves would be able to watch as the Nazis and the Reds would fight each
other". His equerry, Forwood, said something similar in his memoirs:
Whereas the Duke, Duchess and I had no idea that the Germans were or would be
committing mass murder on the Jews, we were none of us averse to Hitler politically. We felt
that the Nazi regime was a more appropriate government than the Weimar Republic, which
had been extremely socialist.
The Windsors returned to Paris on 24 October, with a fortnight to prepare for the tour of the United
States. The week after the Windsors left Munich, the Nazis executed two KPD organisers and
labour leaders: Adolf Rembte and Robert Stamm. They were widely admired in the American labour
movement for their trade union and anti-Nazi activity; their deaths swung popular opinion against the
Duke and the Duchess. Labour unions campaigned against the tour, particularly in the Duchess's
hometown of Baltimore, Maryland. Unions said that they would not support the Windsors' visit and
called them either "emissaries of a dictatorship or uninformed sentimentalists".
Bedaux, who, Vincent suggests, intended to use the Duke to regain possession of his confiscated
German business, was irreparably damaged by the fallout from the Windsors' tour. In 1938, his
German businesses were confiscated by the Nazis permanently. His reputation also suffered in
America, where his operations were forcibly taken over by a U.S.-based subordinate. The
Aftermath
Later events
8/17/24, 7:04 PM 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor - Wikipedia
Duke's public connection to Bedaux, combined with the bad publicity, persuaded Edward to cancel the
tour. The New York Times reported on 23 October that in its view, the German tour,
"demonstrated adequately that the Abdication did rob Germany of a firm friend, if not indeed a
devoted admirer, on the British throne. He has lent himself, perhaps unconsciously, but easily to
National Socialist propaganda." Another correspondent wrote that "the poor fellow must have
very little discretion and must be very badly advised. His going to Germany and hobnobbing with
Hitler and Ley just before visiting America was enough to enrage every liberal organization in the
country."
The American trip had been intended to demonstrate the Duke's leadership qualities, and its
cancellation was sufficiently traumatic to induce him to retire temporarily from public life. U.S.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt wrote a conciliatory letter to the Windsors that expressed hope that
the tour would eventually go ahead. After the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, says
Bloch, the British government removed the Windsors from Europe for the war's duration. The Duke
was appointed governor of the Bahamas. Churchill wrote to Roosevelt in July 1940:
The position of the Duke of Windsor in recent months has been causing His Majesty and His
Majesty's Government some embarrassment as though his loyalties are unimpeachable there
is always a backwash of Nazi intrigue which seeks to make trouble about him now that the
greater part of the continent is in enemy hands. There are personal and family difficulties
about his return to this country. In all the circumstances it was felt that an appointment
abroad might appeal to him, and the Prime Minister has with His Majesty's cordial approval
offered him the Governorship of the Bahamas. His Royal Highness has intimated that he will
accept the appointment. The Duchess called the Bahamas "the St Helena of the 1940s" for them.